GitHub action runners (#67)
040code/040code.github.io: content/posts/2020-05-25-scaling-selfhosted-action-runners/index.md

  <i class="fab fa-github" style="font-size: 200%">&nbsp;</i>Source code for this post</a></p>

## Introduction

Last year GitHub released [self-hosted action runners](https://github.blog/2019-11-05-self-hosted-runners-for-github-actions-is-now-in-beta/) which already empower you to run GitHub actions on your own machines. At the time of, the feature was quite limited; it lacked an API and only supported repository level runners. We could already automate the deployment of a single self-hosted runner for one repo with Terraform on AWS. But the clear drawback here is that you will pay AWS for hosting your instances, even if there is no workload to execute. Over the last months, GitHub released an [API](https://github.blog/changelog/2020-01-27-github-actions-api-beta/) for self-hosted action runners, and support for [org level runners](https://github.blog/changelog/2020-04-22-github-actions-organization-level-self-hosted-runners/) was added. Therefore, now is a good moment to have a second look on how to utilize self-hosted runners, and scale the self-hosted runners up and down based on workload.

## Why?

> Why we are using self-hosted runners? First of all, by running on our own hardware, we created our own trusted environment for our builds that we can connect to networks not available via public runners. Note that because of this reason, we choose to limit the use of self-hosted runners to our private and internal repositories. While wsing self-hosted runners on public repositories is possible, be aware that any pull request will run on your hardware which could have serious security risks. Therefore you should carefully consider to usage of self-hosted runners in this context. A second advantage of hosting our own runners, is that we can fine-tune the required hardware. Finally, local runners allow you to control, and maybe even save, costs, in contrast to public runners that are not free for non-public repo's. The setup we will show will have almost no costs if there are no builds, and by executing the workflows on AWS spot instances we save again some pennies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why we are using self-hosted runners? First of all, by running on our own hardware, we created our own trusted environment for our builds that we can connect to networks not available via public runners. Note that because of this reason, we choose to limit the use of self-hosted runners to our private and internal repositories. While using self-hosted runners on public repositories is possible, be aware that any pull request will run on your hardware which could have serious security risks. Therefore you should carefully consider to usage of self-hosted runners in this context. A second advantage of hosting our own runners, is that we can fine-tune the required hardware. Finally, local runners allow you to control, and maybe even save, costs, in contrast to public runners that are not free for non-public repo's. The setup we will show will have almost no costs if there are no builds, and by executing the workflows on AWS spot instances we save again some pennies.
```

## The idea

The GitHub self-hosted action runner is an agent that you need to install on any machine that needs to pickup and execute workflow. To connect the agent to GitHub you can either choose to register the agent on repo level or org level. For registration you request a registration token ([API](https://developer.github.com/v3/actions/self-hosted-runners/)) and this token is used during the setup of agent. This part is easy to automate, so let's have a look how we can orchestrate the process of creating runners.

> In GitHub every time a workflow is triggered, a `check run` event is created. Can we use this event to decide wether to scale a runner? Yes, if we find a way to receive and listen for the event. Actually, there are two options: using the webhook at the repo or org level, or using the GitHub app. Here, we will use the GitHub app option. The GitHub app can sent a message to our webhook for every `check run` event and we can easily implement this webhook with a AWS Lambda function. This lambda can verify the event, run some other checks and decide to create a EC2 spot instance to facilitate the execution of the workflow. The EC2 spot instances will be linux based with docker so we can run any containerized workload. By handling the events we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In GitHub everytime a workflow is triggered, a `check run` event is created. Can we use this event to decide wether to scale a runner? Yes, if we find a way to receive and listen for the event. Actually, there are two options: using the webhook at the repo or org level, or using the GitHub app. Here, we will use the GitHub app option. The GitHub app can sent a message to our webhook for every `check run` event and we can easily implement this webhook with a AWS Lambda function. This lambda can verify the event, run some other checks and decide to create a EC2 spot instance to facilitate the execution of the workflow. The EC2 spot instances will be linux based with docker so we can run any containerized workload.
```

![idea](idea.png 'concept')

> Being able to create runners on once a workflow is triggers brings us the possibility to scale uip, question remains now how to scale down? Again we could listen for event and next try to scale down. Since a runner instance is not dedicated to only executing one workload. At the moment another workflow requires a build the, the runner will process this build ass well. This make scaling down based on events less trivial. So we took a slightly different and much simpler approach: every x minutes all runners that ere not busy are removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being able to create runners once a workflow is triggered brings us the possibility to scale up. Question remains now how to scale down? Again we could listen for event and next try to scale down. Since a runner instance is not dedicated to only executing one workload. At the moment another workflow requires a build the, the runner will process this build as well. This make scaling down based on events less trivial. So we took a slightly different and much simpler approach: every x minutes all runners that are not busy are removed.
```

    },
    {
      name = "runners"
      tag  = "v0.0.1"
    },
    {
      name = "runner-binaries-syncer"
      tag  = "v0.0.1"
    }
  ]
}
```

Next run `terraform init && terraform apply` the lambda artifacts will be download to your local machine.

### Deploy the action runners

Now we will create all required AWS resources and deploy the lambda functions. Besides this module, we also need a vpc as well. We have a VPC with a public [terraform AWS VPC](https://github.com/terraform-aws-modules/terraform-aws-vpc) module, you can use your own VPC as well. Create a new workspace and the code below to the `main.tf`.

```HCL
provider "aws" {
  region  = local.aws_region
  version = "2.61"
}

locals {
  environment = "blog"
  aws_region  = "eu-west-1"
}

module "vpc" {
  source  = "terraform-aws-modules/vpc/aws"
  version = "2.33"

  name = "vpc-blog"
  cidr = "10.0.0.0/16"

  azs             = ["eu-west-1a", "eu-west-1b", "eu-west-1c"]
  private_subnets = ["10.0.1.0/24", "10.0.2.0/24", "10.0.3.0/24"]
  public_subnets  = ["10.0.101.0/24", "10.0.102.0/24", "10.0.103.0/24"]

  enable_nat_gateway = true
  single_nat_gateway = true
  enable_s3_endpoint = true
}
```

> You can already run and apply the terraform code, once we have finisehd with the setup. We can now add the GitHub action runner module. Events sent on to the webhook will be signed with a secret, therefore we generate a password with [Terraform random provider](https://www.terraform.io/docs/providers/random/). Ensure you set the variables for the lambda zip to the download lambda artifacts, and also add the id's, keys and base64 encoded secret for the GitHub app to the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can already run and apply the terraform code, once we have finished with the setup. We can now add the GitHub action runner module. Events sent to the webhook will be signed with a secret, therefore we generate a password with [Terraform random provider](https://www.terraform.io/docs/providers/random/). Ensure you set the variables for the lambda zip to the download lambda artifacts, and also add the id's, keys and base64 encoded secret for the GitHub app to the configuration.
```

Every 5 minutes the scale down lambda is executed, and if you not running any job you should see the runner is terminated.

![aws-shutting-down](aws-shutting-down.png)

In case you build runners are not starting or registering. The best you can do is follow the trace. In the GitHub app on there is an advanced settings page where you can see the events events sent to the webhook. When the event is not accepted double check the endpoint and secret. Next you can check the logs for the webhook and scale up lambda in cloud watch. Finally you can inspect the EC2 user data logging. Access via SSM (MP: should this be ssh?) is by default enabled. Just select connect to the instance and inspect the log `/var/log/user_data.log`.

## Final thoughts

The abilities of GitHub self-hosted runners are arleady quit neat. But creating the setup as discussed requires some hacks and shortcuts. First of all it would be much easier once GitHub delivers the orchestration component, which will reduce the whole setup to only managing a bit of cloud resources. For example having runners on a Kubernetes cluster including scaling can make it a lot easier to use.

> By delivery an API for actions GitHub gives you the option to build your own setup, the fact that we always need to have a runner registered is quite an hack. Also, the way for scaling down will not win a beauty contest but is necessary because the API does not provide an option to verify wether a runner is still active. Furthermore, the cache of the distribution is bit of a hack to work around some crazy slow downloads that we had experienced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By delivery an API for actions GitHub gives you the option to build your own setup, the fact that we always need to have a runner registered is quite an hack. Also, the way for scaling down will not win a beauty contest but is necessary because the API does not provide an option to verify whether a runner is still active. Furthermore, the cache of the distribution is bit of a hack to work around some crazy slow downloads that we had experienced.
```
